The Machine Stops
by E. M. Forster
Firstpublished inthe Oxfordand CambridgeReview,November1909
1 The Air-Ship
Imagine, if you can, a small room, hexagonal in shape, like the cell of a bee. It is lighted
neither by windownor by lamp, yet it is ﬁlled with a soft radiance. There are no apertures
forventilation,yettheairisfresh. Therearenomusicalinstruments,andyet,atthemoment
thatmymeditationopens,thisroomisthrobbingwithmelodioussounds. Anarmchairisin
the centre, by its side a reading-desk — that is all the furniture. And in the armchair there
sits a swaddled lump of ﬂesh — a woman, about ﬁve feet high, with a face as white as a
fungus. It isto herthatthelittleroombelongs.
An electricbellrang.
Thewomantouched aswitchand themusicwas silent.
“I suppose I must see who it is”, she thought, and set her chair in motion. The chair,
like the music, was worked by machinery and it rolled her to the other side of the room
wherethebellstillrang importunately.
“Who is it?” she called. Her voice was irritable, for she had been interrupted often
since the music began. She knew several thousand people, in certain directions human
intercoursehadadvanced enormously.
But when she listened into the receiver, her white face wrinkled into smiles, and she
said:
“Very well. Let us talk, I will isolate myself. I do not expect anything important will
happen for the next ﬁve minutes — for I can give you fully ﬁve minutes, Kuno. Then I
mustdelivermylectureon ‘MusicduringtheAustralianPeriod’.”
Shetouchedtheisolationknob,sothatnooneelsecouldspeaktoher. Thenshetouched
thelightingapparatus,and thelittleroomwas plungedintodarkness.
“Be quick!” shecalled, herirritationreturning. “Be quick,Kuno;here Iam inthedark
wastingmytime.”
But it was fully ﬁfteen seconds before theround platethat she held in her hands began
to glow. A faint blue light shot across it, darkening to purple, and presently she could see
theimageofherson,who livedontheothersideoftheearth, andhecould seeher.
“Kuno,howslowyouare.”
Hesmiledgravely.
“I reallybelieveyouenjoy dawdling.”“I have called you before, mother, but you were always busy or isolated. I have some-
thingparticularto say.”
“What is it,dearest boy? Be quick. Whycould younotsend itbypneumaticpost?”
“Because Iprefer sayingsuch athing. Iwant—”
“Well?”
“I wantyou tocomeandsee me.”
Vashtiwatched hisface in theblueplate.
“But I can seeyou!” sheexclaimed. “What moredoyouwant?”
“I want to see you not through the Machine,” said Kuno. “I want to speak to you not
throughthewearisomeMachine.”
“Oh, hush!” said his mother, vaguely shocked. “You mustn’t say anything against the
Machine.”
“Why not?”
“Onemustn’t.”
“You talk as if a god had made the Machine,” cried the other. “I believe that you pray
to it when you are unhappy. Men made it, do not forget that. Great men, but men. The
Machine is much, but it is not everything. I see something like you in this plate, but I do
not see you. I hear somethinglike you through this telephone, but I do not hear you. That
iswhyIwantyouto come. Pay meavisit,sothatwecan meetface toface, andtalk about
thehopesthatare inmy mind.”
She repliedthat shecould scarcely sparethetimeforavisit.
“Theair-ship barely takestwo daystoﬂy betweenmeand you.”
“I dislikeair-ships.”
“Why?”
“I dislike seeing the horrible brown earth, and the sea, and the stars when it is dark. I
get noideas inan air-ship.”
“I donotget themanywhereelse.”
“What kindofideas can theairgiveyou?”
Hepaused foran instant.
“Do you not know four big stars that form an oblong, and three stars close together in
themiddleoftheoblong,and hangingfrom thesestars, threeotherstars?”
“No, I do not. I dislike the stars. But did they give you an idea? How interesting; tell
me.”
“I hadan ideathat theywerelikea man.”
“I donotunderstand.”
“Thefourbigstars are theman’sshouldersand hisknees.
The three stars in the middle are like the belts that men wore once, and the three stars
hangingarelikeasword.”
2“A sword?”
“Men carried swordsaboutwiththem,tokillanimalsand othermen.”
“Itdoesnotstrikemeasaverygoodidea,butitiscertainlyoriginal. Whendiditcome
toyou ﬁrst?”
“In the air-ship —” He broke off, and she fancied that he looked sad. She could not
be sure, for the Machine did not transmit nuances of expression. It only gave a general
idea of people — an idea that was good enough for all practical purposes, Vashti thought.
The imponderablebloom, declared by a discredited philosophyto be the actual essence of
intercourse, was rightly ignored by the Machine, just as the imponderable bloom of the
grape was ignored by the manufacturers of artiﬁcial fruit. Something “good enough” had
longsincebeen accepted by ourrace.
“Thetruthis,”hecontinued,“thatIwanttoseethesestarsagain. Theyarecuriousstars.
I want to seethem not from theair-ship, butfrom the surface oftheearth, as ourancestors
did,thousandsofyears ago. Iwant tovisitthesurface oftheearth.”
She wasshocked again.
“Mother, you must come, if only to explain to me what is the harm of visiting the
surface oftheearth.”
“Noharm,”shereplied,controllingherself. “Butnoadvantage. Thesurfaceoftheearth
is only dust and mud, no advantage. The surface of the earth is only dust and mud, no life
remains on it, and you would need a respirator, or the cold of the outer air would kill you.
Onediesimmediatelyin theouterair.”
“I know;ofcourseIshalltakeall precautions.”
“And besides—”
“Well?”
She considered, and chose her words with care. Her son had a queer temper, and she
wishedto dissuadehimfrom theexpedition.
“It is contrary tothespiritoftheage,”sheasserted.
“Do you meanby that,contrary totheMachine?”
“In a sense,but—”
His imageistheblueplatefaded.
“Kuno!”
Hehad isolatedhimself.
ForamomentVashtifeltlonely.
Then she generated the light, and the sight of her room, ﬂooded with radiance and
studdedwithelectricbuttons,revivedher. Therewerebuttonsand switcheseverywhere—
buttonsto call for food for music,for clothing. There was the hot-bathbutton, by pressure
of which a basin of (imitation)marble rose out of the ﬂoor, ﬁlled to the brim with a warm
deodorized liquid. There was the cold-bath button. There was the button that produced
3literature. And there were of course the buttons by which she communicated with her
friends. The room, though it contained nothing, was in touch with all that she cared for in
theworld.
Vashti’s next move was to turn off the isolation switch, and all the accumulations of
the last three minutes burst upon her. The room was ﬁlled with the noise of bells, and
speaking-tubes. What was the new food like? Could she recommend it? Has she had any
ideas lately? Might one tell her one’s own ideas? Would she make an engagement to visit
thepublicnurseriesat an early date? — saythisday month.
To most of these questions she replied with irritation — a growing quality in that ac-
celerated age. She said that the new food was horrible. That she could not visit the public
nurseries through press of engagements. That she had no ideas of her own but had just
been told one-that four stars and three in the middle were like a man: she doubted there
was much in it. Then she switched off her correspondents, for it was time to deliver her
lectureon Australianmusic.
Theclumsysystemofpublicgatheringshadbeenlongsinceabandoned;neitherVashti
nor her audience stirred from their rooms. Seated in her armchair shespoke, whilethey in
theirarmchairsheardher,fairlywell,andsawher,fairlywell. Sheopenedwithahumorous
account of music in the pre-Mongolian epoch, and went on to describe the great outburst
ofsong thatfollowedtheChineseconquest. Remoteand primævalas were themethodsof
I-San-SoandtheBrisbaneschool,sheyetfelt(shesaid)thatstudyofthemmightrepaythe
musiciansoftoday: theyhad freshness;theyhad, aboveall,ideas.
Her lecture, which lasted ten minutes, was well received, and at its conclusion she and
many of her audience listened to a lecture on the sea; there were ideas to be got from the
sea; the speaker had donned a respirator and visited it lately. Then she fed, talked to many
friends,had abath, talkedagain,and summonedherbed.
The bed was not to her liking. It was too large, and she had a feeling for a small bed.
Complaintwasuseless,forbedswereofthesamedimensionallovertheworld,andtohave
hadanalternativesizewouldhaveinvolvedvastalterationsintheMachine. Vashtiisolated
herself-it was necessary, for neither day nor night existed under the ground-and reviewed
all that had happened since she had summoned the bed last. Ideas? Scarcely any. Events
— wasKuno’sinvitationan event?
By her side, on the little reading-desk, was a survival from the ages of litter — one
book. This was the Book of the Machine. In it were instructions against every possible
contingency. If she was hot or cold or dyspeptic or at a loss for a word, she went to
the book, and it told her which button to press. The Central Committee published it. In
accordance withagrowinghabit,itwas richlybound.
Sittingupinthebed,shetookitreverentlyinherhands. Sheglancedroundtheglowing
roomasifsomeonemightbewatchingher. Then,halfashamed,halfjoyful,shemurmured
4“O Machine! O Machine!” and raised the volume to her lips. Thrice she kissed it, thrice
inclined her head, thrice she felt the delirium of acquiescence. Her ritual performed, she
turned to page 1367, which gave the times of the departure of the air-ships from the is-
land in the southern hemisphere, under whose soil she lived, to the island in the northern
hemisphere,whereunderlivedher son.
She thought,“Ihavenotthetime.”
She made the room dark and slept; she awoke and made the room light; she ate and
exchanged ideas with her friends, and listened to music and attended lectures; she make
the room dark and slept. Above her, beneath her, and around her, the Machine hummed
eternally; she did not noticethe noise, for shehad been born with it in her ears. The earth,
carrying her, hummed as it sped through silence, turningher now to theinvisiblesun, now
totheinvisiblestars. Sheawokeand madetheroom light.
“Kuno!”
“I willnottalkto you,”heanswered, “untilyoucome.”
“Haveyou been onthesurfaceoftheearth sincewe spokelast?”
His imagefaded.
Again she consulted the book. She became very nervous and lay back in her chair
palpitating. Think of her as without teeth or hair. Presently she directed the chair to the
wall,andpressedanunfamiliarbutton. Thewallswungapartslowly. Throughtheopening
she saw a tunnel that curved slightly, so that its goal was not visible. Should she go to see
herson,here was thebeginningofthejourney.
Of course she knew all about the communication-system. There was nothing mysteri-
ousinit. Shewouldsummonacaranditwouldﬂywithherdownthetunneluntilitreached
the lift that communicated with the air-ship station: the system had been in use for many,
manyyears,longbeforetheuniversalestablishmentoftheMachine. Andofcourseshehad
studied thecivilizationthat had immediatelypreceded her own — the civilizationthat had
mistakenthefunctionsofthesystem,and haduseditforbringingpeopletothings,instead
of for bringing things to people. Those funny old days, when men went for change of air
insteadofchangingtheairintheirrooms! Andyet—shewasfrightenedofthetunnel: she
hadnotseenitsinceherlastchildwasborn. Itcurved—butnotquiteassheremembered;
it was brilliant — but not quite as brilliant as a lecturer had suggested. Vashti was seized
with the terrors of direct experience. She shrank back into the room, and the wall closed
up again.
“Kuno,”shesaid, “Icannotcometosee you. Iam notwell.”
Immediately an enormous apparatus fell on to her out of the ceiling, a thermometer
wasautomaticallylaiduponherheart. Shelaypowerless. Coolpadssoothedherforehead.
Kunohad telegraphedtoherdoctor.
So the human passions still blundered up and down in the Machine. Vashti drank the
5medicine that the doctor projected into her mouth, and the machinery retired into the ceil-
ing. ThevoiceofKunowas heard askinghowshefelt.
“Better.” Thenwithirritation: “But whydoyounot cometo meinstead?”
“Because Icannot leavethisplace.”
“Why?”
“Because, any moment,somethingtremendousmanyhappen.”
“Haveyou been onthesurfaceoftheearth yet?”
“Not yet.”
“Then what isit?”
“I willnottellyouthroughtheMachine.”
She resumedherlife.
But she thought of Kuno as a baby, his birth, his removal to the public nurseries, her
own visit to him there, his visits to her — visits which stopped when the Machine had
assigned him a room on the other side of the earth. “Parents, duties of,” said the book of
theMachine, ”cease at themomentof birth. P.422327483.” True, but therewas something
special about Kuno — indeed there had been something special about all her children —
and, after all, she must brave the journey if he desired it. And “something tremendous
might happen.” What did that mean? The nonsense of a youthful man, no doubt, but she
must go. Again she pressed the unfamiliar button, again the wall swung back, and she
saw the tunnel that curves out of sight. Clasping the Book, she rose, tottered on to the
platform, and summoned the car. Her room closed behind her: the journey to the northern
hemispherehad begun.
Of course it was perfectly easy. The car approached and in it she found arm-chairs
exactly like her own. When she signalled, it stopped, and she tottered into the lift. One
otherpassengerwasinthelift,theﬁrstfellowcreatureshehadseenfacetofaceformonths.
Few travelled in these days, for, thanks to the advance of science, the earth was exactly
alikeall over. Rapid intercourse, from which thepreviouscivilizationhad hoped so much,
had ended by defeating itself. What was the good of going to Pekin when it was just like
Shrewsbury? Why return to Shrewsbury when it would all be like Pekin? Men seldom
movedtheirbodies;all unrestwas concentrated inthesoul.
The air-ship service was a relic from the former age. It was kept up, because it was
easiertokeepitupthantostopitortodiminishit,butitnowfarexceededthewantsofthe
population. VesselaftervesselwouldrisefromthevomitoriesofRyeorofChristchurch(I
usetheantiquenames),wouldsailintothecrowdedsky,andwoulddrawupatthewharves
of the south — empty. So nicely adjusted was the system, so independent of meteorology,
that the sky, whether calm or cloudy, resembled a vast kaleidoscope whereon the same
patterns periodically recurred. The ship on which Vashti sailed started now at sunset, now
at dawn. But always, as it passed above Rheims, it would neighbour the ship that served
6between Helsingfors and the Brazils, and, every third time it surmounted the Alps, the
ﬂeet of Palermo would cross its track behind. Night and day, wind and storm, tide and
earthquake, impeded man no longer. He had harnessed Leviathan. All the old literature,
withitspraiseofNature, andits fearofNature, rang falseas theprattleofachild.
Yet as Vashti saw the vast ﬂank of the ship, stained with exposure to the outer air, her
horrorofdirectexperiencereturned. Itwasnotquiteliketheair-shipinthecinematophote.
For one thing it smelt — not strongly or unpleasantly, but it did smell, and with her eyes
shut she should have known that a new thing was close to her. Then she had to walk to
it from the lift, had to submit to glances from the other passengers. The man in front
dropped his Book — no great matter, but it disquieted them all. In the rooms, if the Book
was dropped, the ﬂoor raised it mechanically, but the gangway to the air-ship was not so
prepared,andthesacredvolumelaymotionless. Theystopped—thethingwasunforeseen
— and the man, instead of picking up his property, felt the muscles of his arm to see how
they had failed him. Then someone actually said with direct utterance: “We shall be late”
— andtheytrooped onboard, Vashtitreadingon thepages as shedidso.
Inside, her anxiety increased. The arrangements were old-fashioned and rough. There
was even a female attendant, to whom she would have to announce her wants during the
voyage. Of coursea revolving platformran the lengthof the boat, but she was expected to
walkfromittohercabin. Somecabinswerebetterthanothers,andshedidnotgetthebest.
She thoughtthe attendant had been unfair, and spasmsof rage shook her. Theglass valves
hadclosed,shecouldnotgoback. Shesaw,attheendofthevestibule,theliftinwhichshe
had ascended going quietly up and down, empty. Beneath those corridors of shining tiles
wererooms,tierbelowtier,reaching farintotheearth,andineach roomtheresatahuman
being, eating, or sleeping, or producing ideas. And buried deep in the hive was her own
room. Vashtiwas afraid.
“O Machine!” shemurmured,and caressed herBook, and wascomforted.
Then the sides of the vestibuleseemed to melt together, as do the passages that we see
in dreams, the lift vanished, the Book that had been dropped slid to the left and vanished,
polished tiles rushed by like a stream of water, there was a slight jar, and the air-ship,
issuingfrom itstunnel,soared abovethewaters ofatropicalocean.
Itwasnight. ForamomentshesawthecoastofSumatraedgedbythephosphorescence
of waves, and crowned by lighthouses, still sending forth their disregarded beams. These
also vanished, and only the stars distracted her. They were not motionless, but swayed to
and fro above her head, thronging out of one skylight into another, as if the universe and
not the air-ship was careening. And, as often happens on clear nights,they seemed nowto
bein perspective,now ona plane;nowpiled tierbeyondtierintotheinﬁniteheavens,now
concealing inﬁnity, a roof limiting for ever the visions of men. In either case they seemed
intolerable. “Arewetotravelinthedark?” calledthepassengersangrily,andtheattendant,
7who had been careless, generated the light, and pulled down the blinds of pliable metal.
When the air-ships had been built, the desire to look direct at things still lingered in the
world. Hence the extraordinary number of skylights and windows, and the proportionate
discomforttothosewhowerecivilizedand reﬁned. EveninVashti’scabinonestarpeeped
throughaﬂawintheblind,andafterafewhours’uneasyslumber,shewasdisturbedbyan
unfamiliarglow,whichwas thedawn.
Quick as theship had sped westwards, the earth had rolled eastwards quicker still,and
had dragged back Vashti and her companions towards the sun. Science could prolong the
night,butonlyforalittle,andthosehighhopesofneutralizingtheearth’sdiurnalrevolution
had passed,togetherwithhopes thatwere possiblyhigher. To “keep pace withthesun,”or
even to outstrip it, had been the aim of the civilization preceding this. Racing aeroplanes
had been built for the purpose, capable of enormous speed, and steered by the greatest
intellectsoftheepoch. Round theglobetheywent,round andround, westward,westward,
round and round, amidst humanity’s applause. In vain. The globe went eastward quicker
still,horribleaccidentsoccurred,andtheCommitteeoftheMachine,atthetimerisinginto
prominence,declared thepursuitillegal,unmechanical,and punishableby Homelessness.
OfHomelessnessmorewillbesaid later.
Doubtless the Committee was right. Yet the attempt to “defeat the sun” aroused the
last common interest that ourrace experienced about the heavenly bodies, or indeed about
anything. It was the last time that men were compacted by thinking of a power outside
the world. The sun had conquered, yet it was the end of his spiritual dominion. Dawn,
midday,twilight,thezodiacalpath,touchedneithermen’slivesnottheirhearts,andscience
retreated into the ground, to concentrate herself upon problems that she was certain of
solving.
SowhenVashtifoundhercabininvadedbyarosyﬁngeroflight,shewasannoyed,and
tried to adjusttheblind. But theblindﬂew up altogether,and shesawthroughtheskylight
small pink clouds, swaying against a background of blue, and as the sun crept higher, its
radianceentereddirect,brimmingdownthewall,likeagoldensea. Itroseandfellwiththe
air-ship’s motion, just as waves rise and fall, but it advanced steadily, as a tide advances.
Unlessshewascareful, itwouldstrikeherface. Aspasmofhorrorshookherandsherang
for the attendant. The attendant too was horriﬁed, but she could do nothing; it was not her
place to mend the blind. She could only suggest that the lady should change her cabin,
whichsheaccordinglyprepared todo.
People were almost exactly alike all over the world, but the attendant of the air-ship,
perhaps owing to her exceptional duties, had grown a little out of the common. She had
often to address passengers with direct speech, and this had given her a certain roughness
and originality of manner. When Vashti swerved away from the sunbeams with a cry, she
behavedbarbarically — sheput outherhandto steadyher.
8“How dareyou!” exclaimedthepassenger. “You forget yourself!”
The woman was confused, and apologized for not having let her fall. People never
touchedoneanother. Thecustomhadbecomeobsolete,owingtotheMachine.
“Where are wenow?” asked Vashtihaughtily.
“We areoverAsia,”saidtheattendant,anxioustobepolite.
“Asia?”
“You must excuse my common way of speaking. I have got into the habit of calling
places overwhichIpass bytheirunmechanicalnames.”
“Oh, IrememberAsia. TheMongolscame fromit.”
“Beneath us,in theopen air, stoodacitythat wasoncecalled Simla.”
“Haveyou everheard oftheMongolsand oftheBrisbaneschool?”
“No.”
“Brisbane alsostoodintheopenair.”
“Those mountains to the right — let me show you them.” She pushed back a metal
blind. ThemainchainoftheHimalayaswas revealed. “They wereoncecalled theRoofof
theWorld,thosemountains.”
“What afoolishname!”
“You must remember that, before the dawn of civilization, they seemed to be an im-
penetrablewall thattouchedthestars. Itwas supposedthatnoonebutthegodscouldexist
abovetheirsummits. Howwehaveadvanced,thankstotheMachine!”
“How wehaveadvanced, thankstotheMachine!” saidVashti.
“How we have advanced, thanks to the Machine!” echoed the passenger who had
droppedhis Bookthenightbefore, and whowas standinginthepassage.
“And thatwhitestuffinthecracks? — whatis it?”
“I haveforgottenits name.”
“Coverthewindow,please. Thesemountainsgivemeno ideas.”
The northern aspect of the Himalayas was in deep shadow: on the Indian slope the
sun had just prevailed. The forests had been destroyed during the literature epoch for
the purpose of making newspaper-pulp, but the snows were awakening to their morning
glory, and clouds still hung on the breasts of Kinchinjunga. In the plain were seen the
ruins of cities, with diminished rivers creeping by their walls, and by the sides of these
were sometimes the signs of vomitories, marking the cities of to-day. Over the whole
prospect air-ships rushed, crossing the inter-crossing with incredible aplomb, and rising
nonchalantlywhentheydesiredtoescapetheperturbationsoftheloweratmosphereandto
traversetheRoof oftheWorld.
“Wehaveindeedadvanced, thankstotheMachine,”repeated theattendant,andhidthe
Himalayasbehindametal blind.
9The day dragged wearily forward. The passengers sat each in his cabin, avoiding one
another with an almost physical repulsion and longing to be once more under the surface
oftheearth. Therewereeightortenofthem,mostlyyoungmales,sentoutfromthepublic
nurseriestoinhabittheroomsofthosewhohaddiedinvariouspartsoftheearth. Theman
whohaddroppedhisBookwasonthehomewardjourney. HehadbeensenttoSumatrafor
thepurposeofpropagatingtherace. Vashtialonewas travellingby herprivatewill.
At midday she took a second glance at the earth. The air-ship was crossing another
rangeofmountains,butshecouldseelittle,owingtoclouds. Massesofblackrockhovered
below her, and merged indistinctly into grey. Their shapes were fantastic; one of them
resembleda prostrateman.
“No ideas here,”murmuredVashti,and hidtheCaucasus behindametal blind.
In the evening she looked again. They were crossing a golden sea, in which lay many
smallislandsand onepeninsula.
She repeated, “No ideashere,” and hidGreece behindametalblind.
2 The Mending Apparatus
By a vestibule, by a lift, by a tubular railway, by a platform, by a sliding door — by
reversing all the steps of her departure did Vashti arrive at her son’s room, which exactly
resembledherown. Shemightwelldeclarethatthevisitwassuperﬂuous. Thebuttons,the
knobs, the reading-desk with the Book, the temperature, the atmosphere, the illumination
— all were exactly the same. And if Kuno himself, ﬂesh of her ﬂesh, stood close beside
herat last,what proﬁt wastherein that? She was toowell-bredto shakehimbythehand.
Avertinghereyes,shespokeas follows:
“Here I am. I have had the most terrible journey and greatly retarded the development
ofmysoul. Itisnotworthit,Kuno,itisnotworthit. Mytimeistooprecious. Thesunlight
almost touched me, and I have met with the rudest people. I can only stop a few minutes.
Say what youwant tosay,and then Imustreturn.”
“I havebeen threatened withHomelessness,”saidKuno.
She lookedat himnow.
“I have been threatened with Homelessness, and I could not tell you such a thing
throughtheMachine.”
Homelessnessmeansdeath. Thevictimisexposedto theair, which killshim.
“IhavebeenoutsidesinceIspoketoyoulast. Thetremendousthinghashappened,and
theyhavediscoveredme.”
“But why shouldn’t you go outside?” she exclaimed, “It is perfectly legal, perfectly
mechanical,tovisitthesurfaceoftheearth. Ihavelatelybeentoalectureonthesea;there
10is no objection to that; one simply summons a respirator and gets an Egression-permit. It
isnotthekindofthingthatspirituallymindedpeopledo,andIbeggedyounottodoit,but
thereisno legalobjectionto it.”
“I didnotget an Egression-permit.”
“Then howdidyou getout?”
“I foundoutaway ofmyown.”
Thephraseconveyednomeaningto her, and hehadto repeat it.
“A way ofyourown?” shewhispered. “But that wouldbewrong.”
“Why?”
Thequestionshockedherbeyondmeasure.
“You are beginning to worship the Machine,” he said coldly. “You think it irreligious
of me to have found out a way of my own. It was just what the Committee thought, when
theythreatened mewith Homelessness.”
At this she grew angry. “I worship nothing!” she cried. “I am most advanced. I
don’t think you irreligious, for there is no such thing as religion left. All the fear and the
superstition that existed once have been destroyed by the Machine. I only meant that to
ﬁnd outaway ofyourownwas—Besides, thereisno newway out.”
“So itisalways supposed.”
“Except through the vomitories, for which one must have an Egression-permit, it is
impossibletoget out. TheBooksays so.”
“Well, theBook’swrong,forIhavebeen outon myfeet.”
ForKunowas possessedofa certain physicalstrength.
By these days it was a demerit to be muscular. Each infant was examined at birth, and
all whopromisedunduestrengthwere destroyed. Humanitariansmayprotest,but itwould
have been no true kindness to let an athlete live; he would never have been happy in that
stateoflifetowhichtheMachinehadcalledhim;hewouldhaveyearnedfortreestoclimb,
rivers to bathe in, meadows and hills against which he might measure his body. Man must
be adapted to his surroundings, must he not? In the dawn of the world our weakly must
be exposed on Mount Taygetus, in its twilight our strong will suffer euthanasia, that the
Machine may progress, that the Machine may progress, that the Machine may progress
eternally.
“You know that we have lost the sense of space. We say ‘space is annihilated,’ but
we have annihilated not space, but the sense thereof. We have lost a part of ourselves. I
determined to recover it, and I began by walking up and down the platform of the railway
outside my room. Up and down, until I was tired, and so did recapture the meaning of
‘Near’ and ‘Far.’ ‘Near’ is a place to which I can get quickly on my feet, not a place to
which the train or the air-ship will take me quickly. ‘Far’ is a place to which I cannot get
quicklyonmyfeet; thevomitoryis‘far,’ thoughIcouldbethereinthirty-eightsecondsby
11summoning the train. Man is the measure. That was my ﬁrst lesson. Man’s feet are the
measurefordistance,hishandsarethemeasureforownership,hisbodyis themeasurefor
all thatis lovableand desirableand strong. Then I wentfurther: it was then thatIcalled to
youfortheﬁrst time,and youwouldnotcome.
“This city, as you know, is built deep beneath the surface of the earth, with only the
vomitories protruding. Having paced the platform outside my own room, I took the lift to
thenextplatformandpacedthatalso,andsowitheachinturn,untilIcametothetopmost,
abovewhichbeginstheearth. Alltheplatformswereexactlyalike,andallthatIgainedby
visitingthemwastodevelopmysenseofspaceandmymuscles. IthinkIshouldhavebeen
contentwiththis—itisnotalittlething—butasIwalkedandbrooded,itoccurred tome
thatourcitieshadbeenbuiltinthedayswhenmenstillbreathedtheouterair,andthatthere
had been ventilationshafts for the workmen. I could think of nothingbut theseventilation
shafts. Had theybeen destroyedby all thefood-tubesand medicine-tubesand music-tubes
thattheMachinehas evolvedlately? Ordidtraces ofthemremain? Onethingwas certain.
If I came upon them anywhere, it would be in the railway-tunnels of the topmost story.
Everywhereelse,all spacewas accounted for.
“I am telling my story quickly, but don’t think that I was not a coward or that your
answersneverdepressedme. Itisnottheproperthing,itisnotmechanical,itisnotdecent
to walk along a railway-tunnel. I did not fear that I might tread upon a live rail and be
killed. I feared something far more intangible— doing what was not contemplated by the
Machine. Then I said to myself, ‘Man is the measure,’ and I went, and after many visits I
foundan opening.
“The tunnels, of course, were lighted. Everything is light, artiﬁcial light; darkness is
the exception. So when I saw a black gap in the tiles, I knew that it was an exception, and
rejoiced. Iputinmyarm—Icouldputinnomoreatﬁrst—andwaveditroundandround
in ecstasy. I loosened another tile, and put in my head, and shouted into the darkness: ‘I
am coming, I shall do it yet,’ and my voice reverberated down endless passages. I seemed
to hear the spirits of those dead workmen who had returned each evening to the starlight
and to their wives,and all thegenerations who had livedin the open aircalled back to me,
‘You willdoityet, youare coming.’ ”
Hepaused,and,absurdashewas,hislastwordsmovedher. ForKunohadlatelyasked
to be a father, and his request had been refused by the Committee. His was not a type that
theMachinedesired tohand on.
“Then a train passed. It brushed by me, but I thrust my head and arms into the hole. I
had doneenough for oneday, so I crawled back to theplatform, went downin thelift, and
summonedmybed. Ah whatdreams! And againIcalled you,and againyourefused.”
She shookherhead andsaid:
“Don’t. Don’t talk of these terrible things. You make me miserable. You are throwing
12civilizationaway.”
“But I had got back the sense of space and a man cannot rest then. I determined to
get in at the hole and climb the shaft. And so I exercised my arms. Day after day I went
through ridiculous movements, until my ﬂesh ached, and I could hang by my hands and
hold the pillow of my bed outstretched for many minutes. Then I summoned a respirator,
and started.
“It was easy at ﬁrst. The mortar had somehow rotted, and I soon pushed some more
tiles in, and clambered after them into the darkness, and the spirits of the dead comforted
me. I don’t know what I mean by that. I just say what I felt. I felt, for the ﬁrst time, that
a protest had been lodged against corruption, and that even as the dead were comforting
me,soIwascomfortingtheunborn. Ifeltthathumanityexisted,andthatitexistedwithout
clothes. How can I possibly explain this? It was naked, humanity seemed naked, and all
thesetubes and buttonsand machineries neithercame intotheworld withus, nor willthey
followusout,nordo theymattersupremelywhileweare here. Had I been strong,Iwould
have torn off every garment I had, and gone out into the outer air unswaddled. But this is
not for me, nor perhaps for my generation. I climbed with my respirator and my hygienic
clothesand mydietetictabloids! Betterthusthan notat all.
“There was a ladder, made of some primæval metal. The light from the railway fell
uponitslowestrungs,and Isawthatitled straightupwardsoutoftherubbleat thebottom
oftheshaft. Perhapsourancestorsranupanddownitadozentimesdaily,intheirbuilding.
As I climbed, the rough edges cut through my gloves so that my hands bled. The light
helped me for a little, and then came darkness and, worse still, silence which pierced my
ears like a sword. The Machine hums! Did you know that? Its hum penetrates our blood,
and may even guide our thoughts. Who knows! I was getting beyond its power. Then I
thought: ‘ThissilencemeansthatIamdoingwrong.’ ButIheardvoicesinthesilence,and
againtheystrengthenedme.” Helaughed. “Ihadneedofthem. ThenextmomentIcracked
myhead againstsomething.”
She sighed.
“I had reached one of those pneumatic stoppers that defend us from the outer air. You
may have noticed them on the air-ship. Pitch dark, my feet on the rungs of an invisible
ladder, my hands cut; I cannot explain how I lived through this part, but the voices still
comfortedme,andIfeltforfastenings. Thestopper,Isuppose,wasabouteightfeetacross.
I passed my hand overit as far as I could reach. It was perfectly smooth. I felt it almostto
the centre. Not quite to the centre, for my arm was too short. Then the voice said: ‘Jump.
It is worth it. There may be a handle in the centre, and you may catch hold of it and so
cometousyourownway. Andifthereisnohandle,sothatyoumayfallandaredashedto
pieces — it is still worth it: you will still come to us your own way.’ So I jumped. There
was ahandle,and —”
13He paused. Tears gathered in his mother’s eyes. She knew that he was fated. If he did
notdieto-dayhewoulddieto-morrow. Therewasnotroomforsuchapersonintheworld.
And with her pity disgustmingled. She was ashamed at having borne such a son, shewho
had always been so respectable and so full of ideas. Was he really the little boy to whom
shehadtaughttheuseofhisstopsandbuttons,andtowhomshehadgivenhisﬁrstlessons
in the Book? The very hair that disﬁgured his lip showed that he was reverting to some
savagetype. OnatavismtheMachinecan haveno mercy.
“There was a handle, and I did catch it. I hung tranced over the darkness and heard
the hum of these workings as thelast whisperin a dying dream. All the thingsI had cared
aboutandallthepeopleIhadspokentothroughtubesappearedinﬁnitelylittle. Meanwhile
thehandlerevolved. MyweighthadsetsomethinginmotionandIspanslowly,andthen—
“I cannot describe it. I was lying with my face to the sunshine. Blood poured from
my nose and ears and I heard a tremendous roaring. The stopper, with me clinging to it,
had simply been blown out of the earth, and the air that we make down here was escaping
throughtheventintotheairabove. Itburstuplikeafountain. Icrawledbacktoit—forthe
upperair hurts— and, as it were, Itook great sips from theedge. Myrespiratorhad ﬂown
goodness knows where, my clothes were torn. I just lay with my lips close to the hole,
and I sipped until the bleeding stopped. You can imagine nothing so curious. This hollow
in the grass — I will speak of it in a minute, — the sun shining into it, not brilliantly but
through marbled clouds, — the peace, the nonchalance, the sense of space, and, brushing
mycheek, theroaring fountainofourartiﬁcial air! Soon Ispiedmy respirator, bobbingup
and down in the current high abovemy head, and higher still were many air-ships. But no
one ever looks out of air-ships, and in any case they could not have picked me up. There I
was,stranded. Thesunshonealittlewaydowntheshaft, andrevealedthetopmostrungof
the ladder, but it was hopeless trying to reach it. I should either have been tossed up again
by the escape, or else have fallen in, and died. I could only lie on the grass, sipping and
sipping,and from timetotimeglancingaround me.
“IknewthatIwasinWessex,forIhadtakencaretogotoalectureonthesubjectbefore
starting. Wessexliesabovetheroominwhichwearetalkingnow. Itwasonceanimportant
state. Its kings held all the southern coast from the Andredswald to Cornwall, while the
Wansdykeprotectedthemonthenorth,runningoverthehighground. Thelecturerwasonly
concerned with theriseofWessex,so Ido notknowhow longitremained an international
power, nor would the knowledgehave assisted me. To tell the truth I could do nothing but
laugh, during this part. There was I, with a pneumatic stopper by my side and a respirator
bobbingovermyhead,imprisoned,allthreeofus,inagrass-grownhollowthatwasedged
withfern.”
Then hegrewgraveagain.
“Lucky for methat it was a hollow. For theair beganto fall back intoit and to ﬁll it as
14waterﬁllsabowl. Icouldcrawlabout. PresentlyIstood. Ibreathedamixture,inwhichthe
air that hurts predominated wheneverI tried to climb the sides. This was not so bad. I had
not lost my tabloids and remained ridiculously cheerful, and as for the Machine, I forgot
about it altogether. My one aim now was to get to the top, where the ferns were, and to
viewwhateverobjectslay beyond.
“Irushedtheslope. ThenewairwasstilltoobitterformeandIcamerollingback,after
a momentary vision of something grey. The sun grew very feeble, and I remembered that
he was in Scorpio — I had been to a lecture on that too. If the sun is in Scorpio, and you
are in Wessex, it means that you must be as quick as you can, orit will get too dark. (This
is the ﬁrst bit of useful information I have ever got from a lecture, and I expect it will be
the last.) It made me try frantically to breathe the new air, and to advance as far as I dared
out of my pond. The hollow ﬁlled so slowly. At times I thought that the fountain played
withlessvigour. Myrespiratorseemedtodancenearertheearth; theroarwasdecreasing.”
Hebrokeoff.
“I don’t think this is interesting you. The rest will interest you even less. There are no
ideas init,and Iwishthat Ihadnot troubledyoutocome. Weare toodifferent,mother.”
She toldhimtocontinue.
“It was evening before I climbed the bank. The sun had very nearly slipped out of the
sky by this time, and I could not get a good view. You, who have just crossed the Roof of
the World, will not want to hear an account of the little hills that I saw — low colourless
hills. But to me they were living and the turf that covered them was a skin, under which
their muscles rippled, and I felt that those hills had called with incalculable force to men
in the past, and that men had loved them. Now they sleep — perhaps for ever. They
commune with humanity in dreams. Happy the man, happy the woman, who awakes the
hillsofWessex. Forthoughtheysleep, theywillneverdie.”
His voicerosepassionately.
“Cannotyousee,cannotallyoulecturerssee,thatitiswethataredying,andthatdown
here the only thing that really lives is the Machine? We created the Machine, to do our
will, but we cannot make it do our will now. It has robbed us of the sense of space and of
thesenseoftouch,ithas blurredeveryhumanrelationand narroweddownlovetoacarnal
act, it has paralysed our bodies and our wills, and now it compels us to worship it. The
Machine develops — but not on our lines. The Machine proceeds — but not to our goal.
We only exist as the blood corpuscles that course through its arteries, and if it could work
withoutus,itwouldletusdie. Oh,Ihavenoremedy—or,atleast,onlyone—totellmen
againandagainthatIhaveseenthehillsofWessexasÆlfridsawthemwhenheoverthrew
theDanes.
“So the sun set. I forgot to mention that a belt of mist lay between my hill and other
hills,and that itwas thecolourofpearl.”
15Hebrokeoffforthesecond time.
“Go on,”saidhismotherwearily.
Heshookhishead.
“Go on. Nothingthatyou say can distressmenow. I amhardened.”
“I hadmeant totellyou therest, butIcannot: Iknowthat Icannot: good-bye.”
Vashtistoodirresolute. Allhernervesweretinglingwithhisblasphemies. Butshewas
alsoinquisitive.
“This is unfair,” she complained. “You have called me across the world to hear your
story, and hear it I will. Tell me — as brieﬂy as possible, for this is a disastrous waste of
time— tellmehowyou returned tocivilization.”
“Oh — that!” he said, starting. “You would like to hear about civilization. Certainly.
Had Igotto wheremyrespiratorfell down?”
“No — but I understand everything now. You put on your respirator, and managed to
walk along the surface of the earth to a vomitory, and there your conduct was reported to
theCentral Committee.”
“By nomeans.”
He passed his hand over his forehead, as if dispelling some strong impression. Then,
resuminghisnarrative,hewarmed toitagain.
“Myrespiratorfellaboutsunset. Ihadmentionedthatthefountainseemedfeebler, had
Inot?”
“Yes.”
“About sunset, it let the respirator fall. As I said, I had entirely forgotten about the
Machine, and I paid no great attentionat the time, being occupied with other things. I had
my pool of air, into which I could dip when the outer keenness became intolerable, and
whichwouldpossiblyremainfordays,providedthatno windspranguptodisperseit. Not
until it was too late did I realize what the stoppage of the escape implied. You see — the
gap in the tunnel had been mended; the Mending Apparatus; the Mending Apparatus, was
afterme.
“One other warning I had, but I neglected it. The sky at night was clearer than it had
been in the day, and the moon, which was about half the sky behind the sun, shone into
the dell at moments quite brightly. I was in my usual place — on the boundary between
the two atmospheres — when I thought I saw something dark move across the bottom of
the dell, and vanish into the shaft. In my folly, I ran down. I bent over and listened, and I
thoughtIheard afaintscraping noiseinthedepths.
“At this—butitwastoolate—Itookalarm. Ideterminedtoputonmyrespiratorand
towalkrightoutofthedell. Butmyrespiratorhadgone. Iknewexactlywhereithadfallen
—betweenthestopperandtheaperture—and Icouldevenfeel themarkthatithadmade
in the turf. It had gone, and I realized that something evil was at work, and I had better
16escape to the other air, and, if I must die, die running towards the cloud that had been the
colour of a pearl. I never started. Out of the shaft — it is too horrible. A worm, a long
whiteworm, hadcrawled outoftheshaftand was glidingoverthemoonlitgrass.
“I screamed. I did everything that I should not have done, I stamped upon the creature
insteadofﬂyingfromit,and itat oncecurledround theankle. Thenwefought. Theworm
let me run all overthe dell, but edged up my leg as I ran. ‘Help!’ I cried. (That part is too
awful. It belongs to the part that you will never know.) ‘Help!’ I cried. (Why cannot we
sufferinsilence?) ‘Help!’ Icried. Thenmyfeetwerewoundtogether,Ifell,Iwasdragged
away from the dear ferns and the living hills, and past the great metal stopper (I can tell
you this part), and I thought it might save me again if I caught hold of the handle. It also
wasenwrapped,italso. Oh,thewholedellwasfullofthethings. Theyweresearchingitin
alldirections,theyweredenudingit,andthewhitesnoutsofotherspeeped outofthehole,
ready if needed. Everything that could be moved they brought — brushwood, bundles of
fern, everything,anddownweallwent intertwinedintohell. ThelastthingsthatIsaw,ere
the stopper closed after us, were certain stars, and I felt that a man of my sort lived in the
sky. For I did ﬁght, I fought till the very end, and it was only my head hitting against the
ladderthatquietedme. Iwokeupinthisroom. Thewormshadvanished. Iwassurrounded
by artiﬁcial air, artiﬁcial light, artiﬁcial peace, and my friends were calling to me down
speaking-tubestoknowwhetherIhadcomeacross anynew ideaslately.”
Here hisstoryended. Discussionofitwas impossible,andVashtiturned togo.
“It willend inHomelessness,”shesaidquietly.
“I wishitwould,”retorted Kuno.
“TheMachinehas been mostmerciful.”
“I preferthemercyofGod.”
“By thatsuperstitiousphrase, doyoumean thatyou couldlivein theouterair?”
“Yes.”
“Haveyoueverseen,roundthevomitories,thebonesofthosewhowereextrudedafter
theGreat Rebellion?”
“Yes.”
“They were left where they perished for our ediﬁcation. A few crawled away, but they
perished,too— whocan doubtit? And sowiththeHomelessofourownday. Thesurface
oftheearth supportslifenolonger.”
“Indeed.”
“Ferns and a little grass may survive, but all higher forms have perished. Has any
air-shipdetected them?”
“No.”
“Has any lecturerdealtwiththem?”
“No.”
17“Then whythisobstinacy?”
“Because Ihaveseen them,”heexploded.
“Seen what?”
“Because Ihaveseen her inthetwilight—because shecametomy helpwhen Icalled
— because she, too, was entangled by theworms, and, luckierthan I, was killedby oneof
thempiercing herthroat.”
He was mad. Vashti departed, nor, in the troubles that followed, did she ever see his
face again.
3 The Homeless
During the years that followed Kuno’s escapade, two important developments took place
intheMachine. Onthesurfacetheywererevolutionary,butineithercasemen’smindshad
been prepared beforehand, and theydidbut expresstendenciesthatwere latentalready.
Theﬁrst ofthesewastheabolitionofrespirators.
Advanced thinkers, like Vashti, had always held it foolish to visit the surface of the
earth. Air-shipsmightbenecessary, butwhat wasthegoodofgoingoutformerecuriosity
and crawling along for a mile or two in a terrestrial motor? The habit was vulgar and per-
haps faintlyimproper: itwas unproductiveofideas, and had no connection withthehabits
thatreallymattered. Sorespiratorswereabolished,andwiththem,ofcourse,theterrestrial
motors, and except for a few lecturers, who complained that they were debarred access
to their subject-matter, the development was accepted quietly. Those who still wanted to
know what the earth was like had after all only to listen to some gramophone, or to look
into some cinematophote. And even the lecturers acquiesced when they found that a lec-
ture on the sea was none the less stimulatingwhen compiled out of other lectures that had
already been delivered on the same subject. “Beware of ﬁrst-hand ideas!” exclaimed one
of the most advanced of them. “First-hand ideas do not really exist. They are but the
physical impressions produced by love and fear, and on this gross foundation who could
erect a philosophy? Let your ideas be second-hand, and if possible tenth-hand, for then
they will be far removed from that disturbing element — direct observation. Do not learn
anything about this subject of mine — the French Revolution. Learn instead what I think
that Enicharmon thought Urizen thought Gutch thought Ho-Yung thought Chi-Bo-Sing
thought Lafcadio Hearn thought Carlyle thought Mirabeau said about the French Revolu-
tion. Throughthemediumofthesetengreatminds,thebloodthatwasshedatParisandthe
windowsthat were broken at Versailles will be clariﬁed to an idea which you may employ
mostproﬁtablyin yourdaily lives. But besurethat theintermediatesare manyand varied,
forinhistoryoneauthorityexiststocounteract another. Urizenmustcounteractthescepti-
18cismofHo-YungandEnicharmon,ImustmyselfcounteracttheimpetuosityofGutch. You
who listen to me are in a better position to judge about the French Revolution than I am.
Your descendants will be even in a better position than you, for they will learn what you
think I think, and yet another intermediate will be added to the chain. And in time” — his
voicerose—“therewillcomeagenerationthathadgotbeyondfacts,beyondimpressions,
ageneration absolutelycolourless,ageneration
‘seraphicallyfree
From taintofpersonality,’
which will see the French Revolution not as it happened, nor as they would like it to have
happened, butas itwouldhavehappened, had ittaken placeinthedays oftheMachine.”
Tremendousapplausegreetedthislecture,whichdidbutvoiceafeelingalreadylatentin
themindsofmen—afeelingthatterrestrialfactsmustbeignored,andthattheabolitionof
respiratorswasapositivegain. Itwasevensuggestedthatair-shipsshouldbeabolishedtoo.
This was not done, because air-ships had somehow worked themselvesinto the Machine’s
system. Butyear byyear theywereused less,and mentionedless bythoughtfulmen.
Thesecond great developmentwas there-establishmentofreligion.
This, too,had been voiced in thecelebrated lecture. No onecould mistakethereverent
toneinwhichtheperorationhadconcluded,anditawakenedaresponsiveechointheheart
of each. Those who had long worshipped silently, now began to talk. They described the
strangefeelingof peacethat cameoverthemwhen theyhandled theBook oftheMachine,
thepleasurethatitwastorepeatcertainnumeralsoutofit,howeverlittlemeaningthosenu-
meralsconveyedtotheoutwardear,theecstasyoftouchingabutton,howeverunimportant,
orofringinganelectric bell,howeversuperﬂuously.
“The Machine,” they exclaimed, “feeds us and clothes us and houses us; through it we
speak to oneanother, throughit we see oneanother, in it we haveour being. TheMachine
is the friend of ideas and the enemy of superstition: the Machine is omnipotent, eternal;
blessedistheMachine.” Andbeforelongthisallocutionwasprintedontheﬁrstpageofthe
Book,andinsubsequenteditionstheritualswelledintoacomplicatedsystemofpraiseand
prayer. Theword“religion”wassedulouslyavoided,andintheorytheMachinewasstillthe
creationandtheimplementofman. Butinpracticeall,saveafewretrogrades,worshipped
itasdivine. Norwasitworshippedinunity. Onebelieverwouldbechieﬂyimpressedbythe
blueopticplates,throughwhichhesawotherbelievers;anotherbythemendingapparatus,
whichsinfulKunohadcomparedtoworms;anotherbythelifts,anotherbytheBook. And
each would pray to this or to that, and ask it to intercede for him with the Machine as a
whole. Persecution — that also was present. It did not break out, for reasons that will be
set forward shortly. But it was latent, and all who did not accept the minimum known as
19“undenominational Mechanism” lived in danger of Homelessness, which means death, as
weknow.
To attribute these two great developments to the Central Committee, is to take a very
narrow view of civilization. The Central Committee announced the developments, it is
true, but they were no more the cause of them than were the kings of the imperialistic
period the cause of war. Rather did they yield to some invincible pressure, which came
no one knew whither, and which, when gratiﬁed, was succeeded by some new pressure
equally invincible. To such a state of affairs it is convenient to give the name of progress.
No oneconfessed the Machinewas outof hand. Year by yearit was served with increased
efﬁciency and decreased intelligence. The better a man knew his own duties upon it, the
less he understood the duties of his neighbour, and in all the world there was not one
who understood the monster as a whole. Those master brains had perished. They had left
fulldirections,it istrue, and theirsuccessors had each ofthem mastereda portionofthose
directions. ButHumanity,initsdesireforcomfort,hadover-reacheditself. Ithadexploited
the riches of nature too far. Quietly and complacently, it was sinking into decadence, and
progresshad cometomean theprogressoftheMachine.
As for Vashti, her life went peacefully forward until the ﬁnal disaster. She made her
room dark and slept; she awoke and made the room light. She lectured and attended lec-
tures. She exchanged ideas with her innumerable friends and believed she was growing
more spiritual. At times a friend was granted Euthanasia, and left his or her room for the
homelessness that is beyond all human conception. Vashti did not much mind. After an
unsuccessful lecture, she would sometimes ask for Euthanasia herself. But the death-rate
was notpermittedtoexceed thebirth-rate,and theMachinehad hithertorefused itto her.
Thetroublesbeganquietly,longbeforeshewas consciousofthem.
One day she was astonished at receiving a message from her son. They never com-
municated, having nothing in common, and she had only heard indirectly that he was still
alive, and had been transferred from the northern hemisphere, where he had behaved so
mischievously,to thesouthern—indeed, toaroomnot farfrom herown.
“Does he want me to visithim?” she thought. “Never again, never. And I have not the
time.”
No, itwas madnessofanotherkind.
He refused to visualize his face upon the blue plate, and speaking out of the darkness
withsolemnitysaid:
“TheMachinestops.”
“What do yousay?”
“TheMachineisstopping,Iknowit,Iknowthesigns.”
She burstintoapeal oflaughter. He heard herand wasangry, andtheyspokenomore.
20“Can you imagine anything more absurd?” she cried to a friend. “A man who was my
sonbelievesthattheMachineis stopping. Itwouldbeimpiousifitwas notmad.”
“The Machine is stopping?” her friend replied. “What does that mean? The phrase
conveysnothingtome.”
“Norto me.”
“He doesnotrefer, Isuppose,to thetroubletherehas been latelywiththemusic?”
“Oh no, ofcoursenot. Letus talkaboutmusic.”
“Haveyou complainedto theauthorities?”
“Yes,andtheysayitwantsmending,andreferredmetotheCommitteeoftheMending
Apparatus. I complained of those curious gasping sighs that disﬁgure the symphonies of
the Brisbane school. They sound like some one in pain. The Committee of the Mending
Apparatussay thatit shallberemediedshortly.”
Obscurelyworried,sheresumedherlife. Foronething,thedefectinthemusicirritated
her. Foranotherthing,shecouldnotforget Kuno’sspeech. Ifhehadknownthatthemusic
was out ofrepair — he could not know it, for he detested music— if hehad knownthat it
was wrong, “the Machine stops” was exactly the venomous sort of remark he would have
made. Of course he had made it at a venture, but the coincidence annoyed her, and she
spokewithsomepetulanceto theCommitteeoftheMendingApparatus.
Theyreplied, as before, thatthedefect wouldbeset rightshortly.
“Shortly! At once!” she retorted. “Why should I be worried by imperfect music?
Things are always put right at once. If you do not mend it at once, I shall complain to the
Central Committee.”
“NopersonalcomplaintsarereceivedbytheCentralCommittee,”theCommitteeofthe
MendingApparatusreplied.
“Through whomamIto makemy complaint,then?”
“Through us.”
“I complainthen.”
“Yourcomplaintshallbeforwarded initsturn.”
“Haveothers complained?”
Thisquestionwasunmechanical,andtheCommitteeoftheMendingApparatusrefused
toanswerit.
“It is too bad!” she exclaimed to another of her friends. “There never was such an
unfortunate woman as myself. I can never be sure of my music now. It gets worse and
worseeach timeIsummonit.”
“I too havemy troubles,”the friend replied. “Sometimes my ideas are interrupted by a
slightjarring noise.”
“What is it?”
“I donotknowwhetheritis insidemyhead, orinsidethewall.”
21“Complain,in eithercase.”
“I have complained, and my complaint will be forwarded in its turn to the Central
Committee.”
Time passed, and they resented the defects no longer. The defects had not been reme-
died, but the human tissues in that latter day had become so subservient, that they readily
adapted themselvesto everycaprice of theMachine. Thesigh at thecrises of theBrisbane
symphony no longer irritated Vashti; she accepted it as part of the melody. The jarring
noise,whetherintheheadorinthewall,wasnolongerresentedbyherfriend. Andsowith
the mouldy artiﬁcial fruit, so with the bath water that began to stink, so with the defective
rhymes that the poetry machine had taken to emit. All were bitterlycomplained of at ﬁrst,
and thenacquiesced in andforgotten. Thingswent frombad to worseunchallenged.
It was otherwise with the failure of the sleeping apparatus. That was a more serious
stoppage. There came a day when over the whole world — in Sumatra, in Wessex, in the
innumerablecitiesofCourlandandBrazil—thebeds,whensummonedbytheirtiredown-
ers, failed to appear. It may seem a ludicrous matter, but from it we may date the collapse
of humanity. The Committee responsible for the failure was assailed by complainants,
whom it referred, as usual, to the Committee of the Mending Apparatus, who in its turn
assured them that their complaints would be forwarded to the Central Committee. But the
discontentgrew,for mankindwas notyet sufﬁcientlyadaptableto dowithoutsleeping.
“Someoneis meddlingwiththeMachine—”theybegan.
“Someoneis tryingto makehimselfking,to reintroducethepersonalelement.”
“Punish thatman withHomelessness.”
“To therescue! AvengetheMachine! AvengetheMachine!”
“War! Killtheman!”
ButtheCommitteeoftheMendingApparatusnowcameforward,andallayedthepanic
with well-chosen words. It confessed that the Mending Apparatus was itself in need of
repair.
Theeffect ofthisfrank confessionwas admirable.
“Of course,” said a famous lecturer — he of the French Revolution, who gilded each
newdecaywithsplendour—“ofcourseweshallnotpressourcomplaintsnow. TheMend-
ingApparatushastreatedussowellinthepastthatweallsympathizewithit,andwillwait
patiently for its recovery. In its own good time it will resume its duties. Meanwhile let us
do without our beds, our tabloids, our other little wants. Such, I feel sure, would be the
wishoftheMachine.”
Thousands of miles away his audience applauded. The Machinestill linked them. Un-
dertheseas, beneaththerootsofthemountains,ran thewiresthroughwhich theysawand
heard, theenormouseyes andears thatweretheirheritage,and thehumofmanyworkings
clothed theirthoughtsin onegarment of subserviency. Only the old and thesick remained
22ungrateful, for it was rumoured that Euthanasia, too, was out of order, and that pain had
reappeared amongmen.
It became difﬁcult to read. A blight entered the atmosphere and dulled its luminosity.
At times Vashti could scarcely see across her room. The air, too, was foul. Loud were the
complaints, impotent the remedies, heroic the tone of the lecturer as he cried: “Courage!
courage! What matter so long as the Machine goes on? To it the darkness and the light
are one.” And though things improved again after a time, the old brilliancy was never
recaptured, and humanity never recovered from its entrance into twilight. There was an
hystericaltalk of“measures,” of“provisionaldictatorship,”and theinhabitantsofSumatra
wereaskedtofamiliarizethemselveswiththeworkingsofthecentralpowerstation,thesaid
powerstationbeing situatedin France. But for themostpart panicreigned, and men spent
theirstrengthprayingtotheirBooks,tangibleproofsoftheMachine’somnipotence. There
weregradationsofterror—attimescamerumoursofhope—theMendingApparatuswas
almostmended— theenemiesoftheMachinehad been gotunder—new“nerve-centres”
were evolving which would do the work even more magniﬁcently than before. But there
came a day when, without the slightest warning, without any previous hint of feebleness,
the entire communication-system broke down, all over the world, and the world, as they
understoodit,ended.
Vashti was lecturing at the time and her earlier remarks had been punctuated with ap-
plause. As she proceeded the audience became silent, and at the conclusion there was no
sound. Somewhat displeased, she called to a friend who was a specialist in sympathy. No
sound: doubtless the friend was sleeping. And so with the next friend whom she tried to
summon,andsowiththenext,untilsherememberedKuno’scrypticremark,“TheMachine
stops”.
The phrase still conveyed nothing. If Eternity was stopping it would of course be set
goingshortly.
For example, there was still a little light and air — the atmosphere had improved a
few hours previously. There was still the Book, and while there was the Book there was
security.
Then she broke down, for with the cessation of activity came an unexpected terror —
silence.
She had neverknownsilence, and the comingofit nearly killed her— it did killmany
thousands of people outright. Ever since her birth she had been surrounded by the steady
hum. It was to the ear what artiﬁcial air was to the lungs, and agonizing pains shot across
herhead. Andscarcely knowingwhatshedid,shestumbledforward andpressedtheunfa-
miliarbutton,theonethatopened thedoorofhercell.
Now the door of the cell worked on a simple hinge of its own. It was not connected
with the central power station, dying far away in France. It opened, rousing immoderate
23hopesinVashti,forshethoughtthattheMachinehadbeenmended. Itopened,andshesaw
thedimtunnelthatcurvedfar awaytowardsfreedom. Onelook,andthen sheshrankback.
Forthetunnelwasfullofpeople—shewasalmostthelastinthatcitytohavetakenalarm.
Peopleatanytimerepelledher,andthesewerenightmaresfromherworstdreams. Peo-
plewerecrawlingabout,peoplewerescreaming,whimpering,gaspingforbreath,touching
eachother,vanishinginthedark,andeverandanonbeingpushedofftheplatformontothe
liverail. Some were ﬁghtinground theelectricbells, tryingto summontrains which could
not be summoned. Others were yelling for Euthanasia or for respirators, or blaspheming
the Machine. Others stood at the doors of their cells fearing, like herself, either to stop in
them or to leave them. And behind all the uproar was silence — the silence which is the
voiceoftheearth and ofthegenerationswhohavegone.
No — it was worse than solitude. She closed the door again and sat down to wait for
the end. The disintegration went on, accompanied by horrible cracks and rumbling. The
valvesthatrestrainedtheMedicalApparatusmusthaveweakened,foritrupturedandhung
hideously from the ceiling. The ﬂoor heaved and fell and ﬂung her from the chair. A tube
oozed towards her serpent fashion. And at last the ﬁnal horror approached — light began
toebb, and sheknewthatcivilization’slongday was closing.
Shewhirledaround,prayingtobesavedfromthis,atanyrate, kissingtheBook,press-
ing button after button. The uproar outside was increasing, and even penetrated the wall.
Slowlythebrilliancyofhercellwasdimmed,thereﬂectionsfadedfromthemetalswitches.
Nowshecouldnotseethereading-stand,nownottheBook,thoughshehelditinherhand.
Light followed the ﬂight of sound, air was following light, and the original void returned
to the cavern from which it has so long been excluded. Vashti continued to whirl, like the
devotees of an earlier religion, screaming, praying, striking at the buttons with bleeding
hands.
Itwasthusthatsheopenedherprisonandescaped—escapedinthespirit: atleastsoit
seems to me, ere my meditation closes. That she escapes in the body — I cannot perceive
that. Shestruck,bychance,theswitchthatreleasedthedoor,andtherushoffoulaironher
skin,theloudthrobbingwhispersinher ears, toldherthat shewas facing thetunnelagain,
and that tremendousplatform onwhich shehad seen men ﬁghting. Theywere not ﬁghting
now. Only the whispers remained, and the little whimpering groans. They were dying by
hundredsoutin thedark.
She burstintotears.
Tears answered her.
They wept for humanity, those two, not for themselves. They could not bear that this
should be the end. Ere silence was completed their hearts were opened, and they knew
what had been important on the earth. Man, the ﬂower of all ﬂesh, the noblest of all
creatures visible,manwho had oncemadegod inhisimage, and hadmirrored hisstrength
24ontheconstellations,beautifulnakedmanwasdying,strangledinthegarmentsthathehad
woven. Century after century had he toiled, and here was his reward. Truly the garment
had seemed heavenly at ﬁrst, shot with colours of culture, sewn with the threads of self-
denial. Andheavenlyithadbeensolongasitwasagarmentandnomore,mancouldshed
it at willand liveby the essencethat is his soul,and theessence, equally divine, that is his
body. Thesinagainstthebody—itwasforthattheyweptinchief; thecenturiesofwrong
againstthemusclesandthenerves,andthoseﬁveportalsbywhichwecanaloneapprehend
— glozing it over with talk of evolution, until the body was white pap, the home of ideas
as colourless,lastsloshystirringsofa spiritthat hadgrasped thestars.
“Where are you?” shesobbed.
His voicein thedarkness said,“Here.”
“Is thereany hope,Kuno?”
“Noneforus.”
“Where are you?”
She crawledoverthebodiesofthedead. His bloodspurtedoverherhands.
“Quicker,”hegasped,“Iamdying—butwetouch,wetalk,notthroughtheMachine.”
Hekissedher.
“We have come back to our own. We die, but we have recaptured life, as it was in
Wessex, when Ælfrid overthrew the Danes. We know what they know outside, they who
dweltin thecloud thatisthecolourofapearl.”
“But Kuno, is it true? Are there still men on the surface of the earth? Is this — this
tunnel,thispoisoneddarkness —really nottheend?”
Hereplied:
“I have seen them, spoken to them, loved them. They are hiding in the mist and the
ferns untilourcivilizationstops. To-daytheyare theHomeless— to-morrow—”
“Oh, to-morrow—somefool willstarttheMachineagain,to-morrow.”
“Never,”saidKuno,“never. Humanityhas learnt itslesson.”
As he spoke, the whole city was broken like a honeycomb. An air-ship had sailed in
through the vomitory into a ruined wharf. It crashed downwards, exploding as it went,
rending gallery after gallery with its wings of steel. For a moment they saw the nations of
thedead, and,before theyjoinedthem,scrapsoftheuntaintedsky.
TranscribedfromTheEternalMomentandotherStoriesbyE.M.Forster,Sidgwick&Jackson,
Ltd. (London, 1928) and The Collected Tales of E. M. Forster, The Modern Library (New York,
1968).
25